I have a suspicion
that audience development-wise
it won't be a problem
in the province compared to Manila.
The challenge of the regions,
the provinces is content
for their audiences.
Because if you go to an outreach,
like what our regional groups do--
there are actually a lot,
thousands of people who want to watch.
What's important
is how to introduce
these kinds of new content
to the audiences so they continue
to support these kinds of works.
There are writers to begin with.
Ah, so the writers
will really come from--
From the region.
Second, you should have
a group of actors.
Because it's necessary
to have actors and directors in VLF.
If you can pinpoint 2 or 3 directors,
maybe start with that
and a few of the--
Don't be too ambitious
about doing it in a big scale
because VLF started like that.
It started really small
and then it grew.
The venue is an important thing as well.
Space is always important for artists,
which we also lack.
Honestly, I think the reason for VLF's success
is because we have CCP as the venue.
There's a black box made available
year in and year out
and there are rehearsal spaces.
That's important.
Whatever's there in the region,
it's important to
secure the spaces
where artists are given space
to develop and create and innovate.
When it gets tough,
we could always rely on technology.
We could make use of livestream.
One of our successful endeavors,
we call it arts education.
Arts online.
We invite experts like you
to speak before a live
classroom audience at the CCP
but it's streaming
to 4-5 classrooms all over the country.
Live.
- They can even like--
- Ask questions.
It’s simple.
Wi-fi, that’s what you need.
One camera and a contact
who'll say “Okay, at this time
we’re going to stream,”
and hopefully,
the wi-fi doesn’t fail.
And you know,
it has a wide reach.
You have a live coverage
usually on events like those at CCP.
You can immediately reach
30 people live in front of you.
But if you have five classrooms,
and it has 50 people per classroom,
you already have 250 as audience.
300 in a one hour
or two hour event,
very low cost,
but high impact
I just want to add,
with regards to Virgin Labfest,
when it started
it seemed like
a chicken-and-egg situation.
"There aren't any playwrights
because nobody likes to showcase them,"
Where will you start?
Even with VLF, we didn't start
with a “call for submission”
because nobody would submit,
nobody really knew it existed.
We curated available works first,
and not all of them were good.
I mean it was really--
do you remember that?
You undressed there.
It became popular because of her.
She was the virgin offering
in the whole "Sister Outlaw".
People gained interest
because of that.
I think the next thing
is regularity.
We repeated it every year
until people started to look forward to it.
We only started calling
for submissions on the fourth year
because that was the time
the audience recognized
they could write as well.
- That's when it started to roll.
- May I share a small tidbit
that may be exciting
for the VLF participants?
I just met a young architect recently
and he said he saw VLF,
I asked him how
since he was an architect.
You know how he watched VLF?
His father always
dragged him to watch.
His father flew in from Davao
and watched VLF every year.
He goes to watch
and drags his children with him.
There's also one
from Ilocos Norte.
Cool dad.
And his dad
is in his sixties.
That's cool.
Because he really felt
VLF shows very interesting stories.
And he lines up.
Now all his children know about VLF.
So it took like four...
14 years.
This just means
you really have to nurture
your audience.
It's about making them go back
for the experience--
First, they have to enjoy the experience
Okay.
I just want to tell you in this last episode
the writing of any play
never stops with the first draft.
And in fact, if I push the whole thing
it never stops even after production
because what you wrote
always comes back to you.
If you liked the production,
your play's enriched and you're happy.
Even if you disliked the production,
it'll always come back to you.
And another
opportunity will open
for you to find another theme
to produce, display,
and it could never end
like Chris Millado's play.
Even after so many years,
it keeps coming back with a new life.
Once you’ve written it,
it will never cease to grow
until you abandon it.
To paraphrase Joseph Conrad,
"The work is never finished, it’s only abandoned."
It's up to you how
to strengthen or nurture it.
Thank you, everyone!
- Thank you.
You're supposed to be graduates
because this is the final episode.
And thank you very much
for joining me.
Whatever journey you take
in writing your play,
I'll be waiting
to read your work!
You also have the opportunity
to continue this course.
I expect you to write something
and when you're done,
you can submit it to a special group
and talk about it there.
What we call
the Writers' Block online.
If you're not based in Manila,
or don't have the chance
to attend our sessions,
This'll be the venue
where you can submit your works.
And we'll be the first members
of the Writers' Block online.
They'll be ready to help you,
and read and give feedback to your work.
We'll be waiting
for your masterpieces!
And possibly, indirectly,
they might wait for you, too!
You never know.
They might read it and find it
exciting enough to produce.
On that note,
they were able to produce
a lot of things here at the course.
Maybe it'd be good
to send it to them
For them to read it.
You never know.
It could go somewhere.
You should keep on submitting
your script and see where it goes.
Thank you!
- Thank you.